---
title: "Top-down prompting"
date: 2026-06-14
---

Recently, I have found myself frequently prompting AI with _"Please explain shortly and concisely like I was dumb"_. Indeed, anyone dealing with advanced concepts might encounter situations where the model outputs a long, complex, and overly verbose answer that I end up reading diagonally out of laziness... I agree that part of this partial reading is due to laziness at first, but I also realized that for complex topics, AI produces text that is, in my opinion, pretty hard to read and understand.

Therefore, by starting research with a simple, dummy explanation, I was able to proceed incrementally with the subject's level of complexity, which helped me a lot in keeping my interest and focus on the task.

This top-down approach to explanation is universal. At school, teachers usually start with simple and intuitive examples when introducing a new concept. In any social interaction, confused people also ask the other person to either explain with a simple example or to restart from the very beginning.

If we extend the thinking exercise slightly further, we realize we need **context**! This is the crucial variable to consider if you want to maximize the likelihood that your audience will understand your point. And context is applied by levels, which act as checkpoints in the understanding process.

So, instruct the model to treat you like an ignorant. And don't be afraid to do so in real life: we are human, and we cannot understand everything. There is nothing more intelligent than admitting a lack of knowledge.